README.md, before:

# mobx-spine

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/CodeYellowBV/mobx-spine.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/CodeYellowBV/mobx-spine)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/CodeYellowBV/mobx-spine/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/CodeYellowBV/mobx-spine)

A frontend package built upon [MobX](https://mobx.js.org/) to add models and collections. It has first-class support for relations and can communicate to a backend.

By default it comes with a "communication layer" for [Django Binder](https://github.com/CodeYellowBV/django-binder), which is Code Yellow's Python backend framework. It is easy to add support for another backend.

```shell
yarn add mobx-spine lodash mobx moment
npm install mobx-spine lodash mobx moment
```

**Work In Progress.**

mobx-spine is highly inspired by Backbone and by the package we built on top of Backbone, [Backbone Relation](https://github.com/CodeYellowBV/backbone-relation).

## Design differences with Backbone

Since mobx-spine uses MobX, it does not need to have an event system like Backbone has. This means that there are no `this.listenTo()`'s. If you need something like that, look for [`autorun()`](https://mobx.js.org/refguide/autorun.html) or add a [`@computed`](https://mobx.js.org/refguide/computed-decorator.html) property.

Another difference is that in mobx-spine, all properties of a model must be defined beforehand. So if a model has the props `id` and `name` defined, it's not possible to suddenly add a `slug` property unless you define it on the model itself. Not allowing this helps with keeping overview of the props there are.

mobx-spine has support for relations and pagination built-in, in contrast to Backbone.

A model or collection can only do requests to an API if you add an `api` instance to it. This allows for easy mocking of the API, and makes mobx-spine not coupled to Binder, our Python framework. It would be easy to make a package or just a separate file with a custom backend.


## Model

A model is a data container with a set of helper functions. Models should extend `Model` from mobx-spine, and the very least define some properties. 

The `Model` contructor takes 2 arguments: 
- `data`: An object with default values for a model.
- `options`: An object with options.

### Constructor: data

Let's for example define a class `Animal` with 2 properties `id` and `name`.

```js
import { observable } from 'mobx';
import { Model } from 'mobx-spine';

// Define a class Animal, with 2 observed properties `id` and `name`.
class Animal extends Model {
    @observable id = null; // Default value is null.
    @observable name = ''; // Default value is ''.
}
```

If we instantiate a new animal without arguments it will create an empty animal using defaults defined on the model:

```js
// Create an empty instance of an Animal.
const lion = new Animal();

console.log(lion.id); // null
console.log(lion.name); // ''
```

You can also supply data when creating a new instance:

```js
// Create an instance of an Animal with existing data.
const cat = new Animal({ id: 1, name: 'Cat' });

console.log(cat.name); // Cat
```

When data is supplied in the constructor, these can be reset by calling `clear`:

```js
const cat = new Animal({ id: 1, name: 'Cat' });

cat.name = '';
console.log(cat.name); // ''

cat.clear();
console.log(cat.name); // 'Cat'
```

When an undefined property key is supplied, it will be ignored:

```js
const cat = new Animal({ id: 1, name: 'Cat', undefinedProperty: 'will be ignored' });

cat.name = '';
console.log(cat.undefinedProperty); // undefined
```

### Constructor: options

|key|default| | |
|---|---|---|---|
|relations|undefined|Relations to be instantiated when instantiating this model as well. Should be an array of strings.| `['location', 'owner.parents']`


### Properties

In its basic form, a model holds a few properties. These properties are normally observables and default values are defined on the property as well. This will define a basic animal model:

```js
import { observable } from 'mobx';
import { Model } from 'mobx-spine';

// Define a class Animal, with 2 observed properties `id` and `name`.
class Animal extends Model {
    @observable id = null; // Default value is null.
    @observable name = ''; // Default value is ''.
    @observable color; // Default value is undefined.
}
```

You can also define frontend only fields, which will be excluded when performing for example a `save`. These properties start with a underscore:

```js
class Animal extends Model {
    @observable id = null;
    @observable name = '';

    /**
     * Fields starts with underscore, so excluded from saving to 
     * backend because `toBackend` filters them out.
     **/ 
    @observable _notSavedToBackend = true;
}
```

#### Forbidden properties

There are some forbidden property names. Currently these are:

- url
- urlRoot
- api
- isNew
- isLoading
- parse
- save
- clear

### Backend request

A model can communicate with the backend using a few functions:

- fetch
- save
- delete

These functions go through the api, and by default the BinderApi is shipped with mobx-spine.

#### Backend request: fetch

Fetching data can be done by calling `fetch`. Lets look at an example and assume the backend returns with `name` `Garfield`:

```js
const api = new BinderApi();

class Animal extends Model {
    api = api;
    
    // Supply either a backendResourceName (Model will calculate urlRoot) or a urlRoot.
    static backendResourceName = 'animal';
    // urlRoot = '/api/animal/';

    @observable id = null;
    @observable name = '';
}

const animal = new Animal({ id: 2 });

// Performs a GET request: /api/animal/2/
animal.fetch().then(() => {
    console.log(animal.name); // Garfield
});


```

#### Backend request: save

Saving data can be done by calling `save`. Lets look at creating a new model and saving that in the database:

```js
const api = new BinderApi();

class Animal extends Model {
    api = api;
    static backendResourceName = 'animal';

    @observable id = null;
    @observable name = '';
}

class animal = new Animal();

// Performs a POST request: /api/animal/
animal.save().then(() => {
    console.log(animal.id); // 1
});
```

An existing model in the database can be updated as follows:

```js
class animal = new Animal({ id: 1 });

// Performs a PUT request: /api/animal/
animal.save().then(() => {
    console.log(animal.id); // 1
});
```

The `save` function accepts a few paramaters as an `options` object:

|key|default| | |
|---|---|---|---|
|onlyChanges|false|When true, only changes made with `setInput` are saved.| `animal.save({ onlyChanges: true })`
|url|undefined|When set, use specified url for the request.| `animal.save({ url: '/api/animal/special/url' })`
|data|undefined|When set, append `data` to result. Existing keys from `toBackend` will be overwritten by data, while new keys will be added. | `animal.save({ data: { id: 1, some_other_field: 'will be added' } })`
|mapData|undefined|You can change the data which will be used for the request send by supplying a function. First argument is the formatted data ready for sending a request. Called at the very last of data formatting operations.| `animal.save({ mapData: data => (...data, some_other_field: 'will be added' } ) } })`
|forceFields|undefined|When `onlyChanges` is given, you can force fields to be included despite of having no changes.| `animal.save({ onlyChanges: true, forceFields: ['name'] } ) } })`
|relations|undefined|Relations to save when saving this model as well. Note that its not needed to include relations here so that they will be linked, only to save the models themselves. Should be an array of strings.| `animal.save({ relations: ['location', 'owner.parents'] })`

#### Backend request: delete

Deleting a model can be done by calling `model.delete()`. Lets look at an example:

```js
const api = new BinderApi();

class Animal extends Model {
    api = api;
    static backendResourceName = 'animal';

    @observable id = null;
    @observable name = '';
}

class animal = new Animal({ id: 2 });

// Performs a DELETE request: /api/animal/2/
animal.delete();


An example with a Store (called a Collection in Backbone).
```

### Relations

Models can have relations to other models / stores. These relations are defined as follows:

```js
class Breed extends Model {
    @observable id = null;
    @observable name = '';
}

class AnimalStore extends Store {
    Model = Animal;
}

class Animal extends Model {
    @observable id = null;
    @observable name = '';

    relations() {
        return {
            breed: Breed, // Define a breed relation to Breed.
            relatives: AnimalStore, // Define a relatives relation to AnimalStore.
        };
    }
}
```

You can now instantiate the animal with it's breed & relatives relation recursively:

```js
class animal = new Animal(
    { 
        id: 2, 
        name: 'Rova', 
        breed: { id: 3, name: 'Main Coon' }, 
        relatives: [
            { id: 5, name: 'Gizmo', breed: { id: 3, name: 'Main Coon' } },
            { id: 7, name: 'Chiggy', breed: { id: 5, name: 'Mixed' } },
        ],
    }, { 
        relations: ['breed', 'relatives.breed'] 
    }
);

console.log(animal.name); // Rova
console.log(animal.breed.name); // Main Coon
console.log(animal.relatives.get(5).name); // Gizmo
console.log(animal.relatives.get(5).breed.name); // Main Coon
console.log(animal.relatives.get(7).name); // Chiggy
console.log(animal.relatives.get(7).breed.name); // Mixed
```

You can now instantiate the animal without it's breed relation and try to access it, it will throw an error:

```js
class animal = new Animal({ id: 2, name: 'Rova', breed: { id: 3, name: 'Main Coon' } });

console.log(animal.breed.name); // Throws cannot read property name from undefined.
```

### Pick fields

You can pick fields by either defining a static `pickFields` variable or a `pickFields` function. Keep in mind that `id` is mandatory, so it will always be included.

#### As a static field
```js
class Animal extends Model {
    static pickFields = ['name'];

    @observable id = null;
    @observable name = '';
    @observable color = '';
}

const animal = new Animal({ id: 1, name: 'King', color: 'orange' });
animal.toBackend(); // { id: 1, name: 'King' }
```

#### As a function
```js
class Animal extends Model {
    pickFields() {
        return ['name];
    }

    @observable id = null;
    @observable name = '';
    @observable color = '';
}

const animal = new Animal({ id: 1, name: 'King', color: 'orange' });
animal.toBackend(); // { id: 1, name: 'King' }
```

### Omit fields

You can omit fields by either defining a static `omitFields` variable or a `omitFields` function. Keep in mind that `id` is mandatory, so it will always be included.

#### As a static field
```js
class Animal extends Model {
    static omitFields = ['color'];

    @observable id = null;
    @observable name = '';
    @observable color = '';
}

const animal = new Animal({ id: 1, name: 'King', color: 'orange' });
animal.toBackend(); // { id: 1, name: 'King' }
```

#### As a function
```js
class Animal extends Model {
    omitFields() {
        return ['color];
    }

    @observable id = null;
    @observable name = '';
    @observable color = '';
}

const animal = new Animal({ id: 1, name: 'King', color: 'orange' });
animal.toBackend(); // { id: 1, name: 'King' }
```

### Update properties

There are 2 ways to update properties:

- Direct assignment
- Using `setInput`

```js
lion.name = 'Lion'; // Direct assignment, doesn't register a change on the `name` property.
lion.setInput('name',  'Lion'); // Use `setInput` which registers a change on the `name` property.
```

When using `setInput`, a `model.save({ onlyChanges: true })` will only submit fields to the backend which have been changed using `setInput`.

## Store

A Store (Collection in Backbone) is holds multiple instances of models and have several helper functions.

### Constructor: options

|key|default| | |
|---|---|---|---|
|relations|undefined|Relations to be instantiated when new models are instantiated using `add()`. Should be an array of strings.| `animalStore = new AnimalStore({ relations: ['location', 'owner.parents'] })`
|limit|25|Page size per fetch, also able to set using `setLimit()`. By default a limit is always set, but there are occations where you want to fetch everything. In this case, set limit to false. | `animalStore = new AnimalStore({ limit: false })`
|comparator|undefined| The models in the store will be sorted by comparator. When it's a string, the models will be sorted by that property name. If it's a function, the models will be sorted using the [default array sort](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/sort). | `animalStore = new AnimalStore({ comparator: 'name' })`
|params|undefined| All params will be converted to GET params. This is used for quering the server to fill the store with models. | `animalStore = new AnimalStore({ params: { 'search': 'Gizmo' } })`

### Adding models

Adding models to a store can be done using `store.add()`. You can supply either an object or an array of objects:

```js
import { Model } from 'mobx-spine';

class AnimalStore extends Store {
    Model = Animal;
}

const animalStore = new AnimalStore();

animalStore.add({ id: 1, name: 'Rova' });

console.log(animalStore.length) // 1
console.log(animalStore.at(0).name) // Rova

animalStore.add([
    { id: 2, name: 'Gizmo' },
    { id: 3, name: 'Diva' },
]);

console.log(animalStore.length) // 3
console.log(animalStore.at(0).name) // Rova
console.log(animalStore.at(1).name) // Gizmo
console.log(animalStore.at(2).name) // Diva
```

### Getting models

There are a few ways to get a specific model:

- `get`: Use models id.
- `at`: Use model index.
- `find`: Use callback.
- `store.models`: Get the mobx array that holds the models.

Some examples:

```js
animalStore.add([
    { id: 1, name: 'Rova' },
    { id: 2, name: 'Gizmo' },
    { id: 3, name: 'Diva' },
]);

console.log(animalStore.at(0).name) // Rova
console.log(animalStore.get(1).name) // Rova
console.log(animalStore.find(animal => animal.name === 'Rova').name) // Rova
console.log(animalStore.models.find(animal => animal.name === 'Rova').name) // Rova
```

### Backend request

A store can communicate with the backend using a few functions:

- fetch

These functions go through the api, and by default the BinderApi is shipped with mobx-spine.

### Backend request: fetch

Fetching data can be done by calling `fetch`. Lets look at an example and assume the backend returns 1 model with `name` `Garfield`:

```js
const api = new BinderApi();

class AnimalStore extends Store {
    Model = Animal
    api = api;
    
    // Supply either a backendResourceName (Model will calculate url) or a url.
    static backendResourceName = 'animal';
    // url = '/api/animal/';
}

const animalStore = new AnimalStore();

// Performs a GET request: /api/animal/?limit=25
animalStore.fetch().then(() => {
    console.log(animalStore.at(0).name); // Garfield
});
```

Commit message:

Negative Ids by default. Ref T32139

README.md, after:

# mobx-spine

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/CodeYellowBV/mobx-spine.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/CodeYellowBV/mobx-spine)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/CodeYellowBV/mobx-spine/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/CodeYellowBV/mobx-spine)

A frontend package built upon [MobX](https://mobx.js.org/) to add models and collections. It has first-class support for relations and can communicate to a backend.

By default it comes with a "communication layer" for [Django Binder](https://github.com/CodeYellowBV/django-binder), which is Code Yellow's Python backend framework. It is easy to add support for another backend.

```shell
yarn add mobx-spine lodash mobx moment
npm install mobx-spine lodash mobx moment
```

**Work In Progress.**

mobx-spine is highly inspired by Backbone and by the package we built on top of Backbone, [Backbone Relation](https://github.com/CodeYellowBV/backbone-relation).

## Design differences with Backbone

Since mobx-spine uses MobX, it does not need to have an event system like Backbone has. This means that there are no `this.listenTo()`'s. If you need something like that, look for [`autorun()`](https://mobx.js.org/refguide/autorun.html) or add a [`@computed`](https://mobx.js.org/refguide/computed-decorator.html) property.

Another difference is that in mobx-spine, all properties of a model must be defined beforehand. So if a model has the props `id` and `name` defined, it's not possible to suddenly add a `slug` property unless you define it on the model itself. Not allowing this helps with keeping overview of the props there are.

mobx-spine has support for relations and pagination built-in, in contrast to Backbone.

A model or collection can only do requests to an API if you add an `api` instance to it. This allows for easy mocking of the API, and makes mobx-spine not coupled to Binder, our Python framework. It would be easy to make a package or just a separate file with a custom backend.


## Model

A model is a data container with a set of helper functions. Models should extend `Model` from mobx-spine, and the very least define some properties. 

The `Model` contructor takes 2 arguments: 
- `data`: An object with default values for a model.
- `options`: An object with options.

### Constructor: data

Let's for example define a class `Animal` with 2 properties `id` and `name`.

```js
import { observable } from 'mobx';
import { Model } from 'mobx-spine';

// Define a class Animal, with 2 observed properties `id` and `name`.
class Animal extends Model {
    @observable id; // Default value is undefined, a new negative integer will automatically be generated for a new model.
    @observable name = ''; // Default value is ''.
}
```

If we instantiate a new animal without arguments it will create an empty animal using defaults defined on the model:

```js
// Create an empty instance of an Animal.
const lion = new Animal();

console.log(lion.id); // -1, a unique negative integer for this model
console.log(lion.name); // ''
```

You can also supply data when creating a new instance:

```js
// Create an instance of an Animal with existing data.
const cat = new Animal({ id: 1, name: 'Cat' });

console.log(cat.name); // Cat
console.log(cat.id); // 1
```

When data is supplied in the constructor, these can be reset by calling `clear`:

```js
const cat = new Animal({ id: 1, name: 'Cat' });

cat.name = '';
console.log(cat.name); // ''

cat.clear();
console.log(cat.name); // 'Cat'
```

When an undefined property key is supplied, it will be ignored:

```js
const cat = new Animal({ id: 1, name: 'Cat', undefinedProperty: 'will be ignored' });

cat.name = '';
console.log(cat.undefinedProperty); // undefined
```

### New models
A new model is a model that exists in the store, but not on the backend. A new model either has a negative id, or the id is `null`. Checking if a model is new can be done with `model.isNew()` which returns a boolean `true` when the model is new.

By default, a new model will be initialized with a negative id, this way the model can be used as a related model. When a model is initialized with a negative id it will automatically generate a new negative id for the model on a clear. In some cases a `null` id might be preferred, in this case a model can be forced to get a `null` id by passing `{id: null}` in the constructor. In this case the id will also be reset to `null` on a clear. A model with a `null` id functions the same as a model with a negative id other than that the model cannot be used in a relation.

Some projects might still use the legacy method of checking for new models by checking if `!model.id`. This does not work with the default negative IDs. To migrate a project to the default negative IDs implementation you should search and replace the whole project for occurrences of `.id` and fix all lines that check if an id is set to use the `isNew()` property.

### Constructor: options

|key|default| | |
|---|---|---|---|
|relations|undefined|Relations to be instantiated when instantiating this model as well. Should be an array of strings.| `['location', 'owner.parents']`


### Properties

In its basic form, a model holds a few properties. These properties are normally observables and default values are defined on the property as well. This will define a basic animal model:

```js
import { observable } from 'mobx';
import { Model } from 'mobx-spine';

// Define a class Animal, with 2 observed properties `id` and `name`.
class Animal extends Model {
    @observable id = null; // Default value is null.
    @observable name = ''; // Default value is ''.
    @observable color; // Default value is undefined.
}
```

You can also define frontend only fields, which will be excluded when performing for example a `save`. These properties start with a underscore:

```js
class Animal extends Model {
    @observable id = null;
    @observable name = '';

    /**
     * Fields starts with underscore, so excluded from saving to 
     * backend because `toBackend` filters them out.
     **/ 
    @observable _notSavedToBackend = true;
}
```

#### Forbidden properties

There are some forbidden property names. Currently these are:

- url
- urlRoot
- api
- isNew
- isLoading
- parse
- save
- clear

### Backend request

A model can communicate with the backend using a few functions:

- fetch
- save
- delete

These functions go through the api, and by default the BinderApi is shipped with mobx-spine.

#### Backend request: fetch

Fetching data can be done by calling `fetch`. Lets look at an example and assume the backend returns with `name` `Garfield`:

```js
const api = new BinderApi();

class Animal extends Model {
    api = api;
    
    // Supply either a backendResourceName (Model will calculate urlRoot) or a urlRoot.
    static backendResourceName = 'animal';
    // urlRoot = '/api/animal/';

    @observable id = null;
    @observable name = '';
}

const animal = new Animal({ id: 2 });

// Performs a GET request: /api/animal/2/
animal.fetch().then(() => {
    console.log(animal.name); // Garfield
});


```

#### Backend request: save

Saving data can be done by calling `save`. Lets look at creating a new model and saving that in the database:

```js
const api = new BinderApi();

class Animal extends Model {
    api = api;
    static backendResourceName = 'animal';

    @observable id = null;
    @observable name = '';
}

class animal = new Animal();

// Performs a POST request: /api/animal/
animal.save().then(() => {
    console.log(animal.id); // 1
});
```

An existing model in the database can be updated as follows:

```js
class animal = new Animal({ id: 1 });

// Performs a PUT request: /api/animal/
animal.save().then(() => {
    console.log(animal.id); // 1
});
```

The `save` function accepts a few paramaters as an `options` object:

|key|default| | |
|---|---|---|---|
|onlyChanges|false|When true, only changes made with `setInput` are saved.| `animal.save({ onlyChanges: true })`
|url|undefined|When set, use specified url for the request.| `animal.save({ url: '/api/animal/special/url' })`
|data|undefined|When set, append `data` to result. Existing keys from `toBackend` will be overwritten by data, while new keys will be added. | `animal.save({ data: { id: 1, some_other_field: 'will be added' } })`
|mapData|undefined|You can change the data which will be used for the request send by supplying a function. First argument is the formatted data ready for sending a request. Called at the very last of data formatting operations.| `animal.save({ mapData: data => (...data, some_other_field: 'will be added' } ) } })`
|forceFields|undefined|When `onlyChanges` is given, you can force fields to be included despite of having no changes.| `animal.save({ onlyChanges: true, forceFields: ['name'] } ) } })`
|relations|undefined|Relations to save when saving this model as well. Note that its not needed to include relations here so that they will be linked, only to save the models themselves. Should be an array of strings.| `animal.save({ relations: ['location', 'owner.parents'] })`

#### Backend request: delete

Deleting a model can be done by calling `model.delete()`. Lets look at an example:

```js
const api = new BinderApi();

class Animal extends Model {
    api = api;
    static backendResourceName = 'animal';

    @observable id = null;
    @observable name = '';
}

class animal = new Animal({ id: 2 });

// Performs a DELETE request: /api/animal/2/
animal.delete();


An example with a Store (called a Collection in Backbone).
```

### Relations

Models can have relations to other models / stores. These relations are defined as follows:

```js
class Breed extends Model {
    @observable id = null;
    @observable name = '';
}

class AnimalStore extends Store {
    Model = Animal;
}

class Animal extends Model {
    @observable id = null;
    @observable name = '';

    relations() {
        return {
            breed: Breed, // Define a breed relation to Breed.
            relatives: AnimalStore, // Define a relatives relation to AnimalStore.
        };
    }
}
```

You can now instantiate the animal with it's breed & relatives relation recursively:

```js
class animal = new Animal(
    { 
        id: 2, 
        name: 'Rova', 
        breed: { id: 3, name: 'Main Coon' }, 
        relatives: [
            { id: 5, name: 'Gizmo', breed: { id: 3, name: 'Main Coon' } },
            { id: 7, name: 'Chiggy', breed: { id: 5, name: 'Mixed' } },
        ],
    }, { 
        relations: ['breed', 'relatives.breed'] 
    }
);

console.log(animal.name); // Rova
console.log(animal.breed.name); // Main Coon
console.log(animal.relatives.get(5).name); // Gizmo
console.log(animal.relatives.get(5).breed.name); // Main Coon
console.log(animal.relatives.get(7).name); // Chiggy
console.log(animal.relatives.get(7).breed.name); // Mixed
```

You can now instantiate the animal without it's breed relation and try to access it, it will throw an error:

```js
class animal = new Animal({ id: 2, name: 'Rova', breed: { id: 3, name: 'Main Coon' } });

console.log(animal.breed.name); // Throws cannot read property name from undefined.
```

### Negative IDs for related models
A related model will always be initialized with a `null` id. When the id of the related model is set to `null` it indicates to django-binder that the field is empty. 

### Pick fields

You can pick fields by either defining a static `pickFields` variable or a `pickFields` function. Keep in mind that `id` is mandatory, so it will always be included.

#### As a static field
```js
class Animal extends Model {
    static pickFields = ['name'];

    @observable id = null;
    @observable name = '';
    @observable color = '';
}

const animal = new Animal({ id: 1, name: 'King', color: 'orange' });
animal.toBackend(); // { id: 1, name: 'King' }
```

#### As a function
```js
class Animal extends Model {
    pickFields() {
        return ['name];
    }

    @observable id = null;
    @observable name = '';
    @observable color = '';
}

const animal = new Animal({ id: 1, name: 'King', color: 'orange' });
animal.toBackend(); // { id: 1, name: 'King' }
```

### Omit fields

You can omit fields by either defining a static `omitFields` variable or a `omitFields` function. Keep in mind that `id` is mandatory, so it will always be included.

#### As a static field
```js
class Animal extends Model {
    static omitFields = ['color'];

    @observable id = null;
    @observable name = '';
    @observable color = '';
}

const animal = new Animal({ id: 1, name: 'King', color: 'orange' });
animal.toBackend(); // { id: 1, name: 'King' }
```

#### As a function
```js
class Animal extends Model {
    omitFields() {
        return ['color];
    }

    @observable id = null;
    @observable name = '';
    @observable color = '';
}

const animal = new Animal({ id: 1, name: 'King', color: 'orange' });
animal.toBackend(); // { id: 1, name: 'King' }
```

### Update properties

There are 2 ways to update properties:

- Direct assignment
- Using `setInput`

```js
lion.name = 'Lion'; // Direct assignment, doesn't register a change on the `name` property.
lion.setInput('name',  'Lion'); // Use `setInput` which registers a change on the `name` property.
```

When using `setInput`, a `model.save({ onlyChanges: true })` will only submit fields to the backend which have been changed using `setInput`.

## Store

A Store (Collection in Backbone) is holds multiple instances of models and have several helper functions.

### Constructor: options

|key|default| | |
|---|---|---|---|
|relations|undefined|Relations to be instantiated when new models are instantiated using `add()`. Should be an array of strings.| `animalStore = new AnimalStore({ relations: ['location', 'owner.parents'] })`
|limit|25|Page size per fetch, also able to set using `setLimit()`. By default a limit is always set, but there are occations where you want to fetch everything. In this case, set limit to false. | `animalStore = new AnimalStore({ limit: false })`
|comparator|undefined| The models in the store will be sorted by comparator. When it's a string, the models will be sorted by that property name. If it's a function, the models will be sorted using the [default array sort](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/sort). | `animalStore = new AnimalStore({ comparator: 'name' })`
|params|undefined| All params will be converted to GET params. This is used for quering the server to fill the store with models. | `animalStore = new AnimalStore({ params: { 'search': 'Gizmo' } })`

### Adding models

Adding models to a store can be done using `store.add()`. You can supply either an object or an array of objects:

```js
import { Model } from 'mobx-spine';

class AnimalStore extends Store {
    Model = Animal;
}

const animalStore = new AnimalStore();

animalStore.add({ id: 1, name: 'Rova' });

console.log(animalStore.length) // 1
console.log(animalStore.at(0).name) // Rova

animalStore.add([
    { id: 2, name: 'Gizmo' },
    { id: 3, name: 'Diva' },
]);

console.log(animalStore.length) // 3
console.log(animalStore.at(0).name) // Rova
console.log(animalStore.at(1).name) // Gizmo
console.log(animalStore.at(2).name) // Diva
```

### Getting models

There are a few ways to get a specific model:

- `get`: Use models id.
- `at`: Use model index.
- `find`: Use callback.
- `store.models`: Get the mobx array that holds the models.

Some examples:

```js
animalStore.add([
    { id: 1, name: 'Rova' },
    { id: 2, name: 'Gizmo' },
    { id: 3, name: 'Diva' },
]);

console.log(animalStore.at(0).name) // Rova
console.log(animalStore.get(1).name) // Rova
console.log(animalStore.find(animal => animal.name === 'Rova').name) // Rova
console.log(animalStore.models.find(animal => animal.name === 'Rova').name) // Rova
```

### Backend request

A store can communicate with the backend using a few functions:

- fetch

These functions go through the api, and by default the BinderApi is shipped with mobx-spine.

### Backend request: fetch

Fetching data can be done by calling `fetch`. Lets look at an example and assume the backend returns 1 model with `name` `Garfield`:

```js
const api = new BinderApi();

class AnimalStore extends Store {
    Model = Animal
    api = api;
    
    // Supply either a backendResourceName (Model will calculate url) or a url.
    static backendResourceName = 'animal';
    // url = '/api/animal/';
}

const animalStore = new AnimalStore();

// Performs a GET request: /api/animal/?limit=25
animalStore.fetch().then(() => {
    console.log(animalStore.at(0).name); // Garfield
});
```
